Adds proposal for AutoDetection on LSO (#190)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/local-storage/automatic-detection.md

## Motivation

For consuming local storage from the nodes available in the OpenShift cluster a good amount of manual work has to be done for creating local PVs out of it, making hot-swapping of disks tough.

### Goals

- Automatically detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.
- Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.
- Should have options for excluding a particular kind of disks.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

`local-storage-operator`is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of it, but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR. The idea is to bring in one more layer of CR above it called `AutoDetectVolumes`.
The controller for this CR will be responsible for automatically detecting disks/devices from the available nodes and creating/managing the life cycle of `LocalVolumes` which are governed by the `AutoDetectVolumes`.s

### Risks and Mitigations

> N/A

Reviewer: Risks:
* Detecting disks that contain data and/or are in-use
* Ensuring disks aren't re-detected as new or otherwise destroyed if their device path changes

Author: Thanks for the suggestion added it :)

Reviewer 2: For the first risk, should checking whether device has partitions and/or device has a filesystem suffice, to ensure that device is already in use or contain data.

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```
type DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType string

> const (

Reviewer: This list of constants seems inconsistent w/ the comment at L107.

Author: yup updated

	SSDs     DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "ssd"

> 	Disks    DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "disk"

Reviewer: The meaning of "disk" is unclear. Is it "entire device" (i.e., not partition) or "rotational"?
I assume "ssd" is really "non-rotational" (or would there be a distinction related to NVMe)?

Author: yeah can be difficult to exclude rotational and non-rotational disk.

Author: I added two more fields for excluding rotational and non-rotational devices.

	// Volume mode. Raw or with file system
	// + optional
	VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
	// File system type
	// +optional
	FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
	// Nodes on which the autoDetection must run
	// +optional
	NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
	// DeviceDiscoverPolicies are the list of policies that AutoDetectVolume's controller
	// will be looking for during detection
	DeviceDiscoveryPolicies []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicies,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
	Status string `json:"status"`
}

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicy struct {
	// Device type that should be used for auto detection. This would be one of the types supported
	// by the local-storage operator. Initial possible types can be - crypt,raid1, raid4, raid5,
	// raid10, multipath, disk, tape, printer, processor, worm, rom, scanner, mo-disk, changer,
	// comm, raid, enclosure, rbc, osd, and no-lun.
	DeviceType DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`
	// A list of regular expressions that will be used to exclude certain devices
	// For example - ["^rbd[0-9]+p?[0-9]{0,}$"]
	// +optional

> 	DeviceExclusionFilter []string `json:"deviceExclusionFilter"`

Reviewer: How are these elements combined (AND or OR)--- Must it match all to be excluded or just one?

Should there be a DeviceInclusionFilter (that defaults to `".*"`)?

Author: its a OR combination. If anything matches it will be excluded. There will be a default Exclusion Filter for sure.

Reviewer 3: (isType1 OR isType2 ...  OR isTypeN ) AND (!matchesFilter1 OR !matchesFilter2 ... OR !matchesFilter3)

right?

Reviewer 4: I would suggest starting with an inclusion filter. By default, exclusion could just be devices that we detect as being in use (for example, have a filesystem). As a bonus, the exclusion filter could also remove devices from the list. I'd also call it `DeviceNameInclusionFilter` so it's obviously filtering on the name.

Reviewer 5: +1 for inclusion pattern rather than exclusion

Author: added the inclusion pattern

}
```

### Test Plan

- The integration tests for Local-Storage operators already exists. Those tests needs to be upgraded for testing this features.

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Examples

These are generalized examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned
[maturity levels][maturity-levels].

##### Removing a deprecated feature

- None of the features are getting deprecated

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

N/A

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives

> N/A

Reviewer: * Existing manual creation of `LocalVolume` CRs. With the node selector on the LocalVolume, a single CR can apply to an entire class of nodes (i.e., a machineset or a physical rack of homogeneous hardware).
  * When a machineset is defined, a corresponding LocalVolume can also be created. Why is this insufficient?
* Directly enhancing the `LocalVolume` CR to allow for autodiscovery

Reviewer 3: > When a machineset is defined, a corresponding LocalVolume can also be created. Why is this insufficient?
UPI, direct attachment of disk to machine.

Reviewer: UPI already has [many manual steps](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.3/machine_management/more-rhel-compute.html). Are we saving much?

How common is manually attaching a disk to a machine? This seems to go against the notion of machines as cattle.

Reviewer 3: @jarrpa can you comment on the requirement for auto discovery?

Reviewer 6: It might be worth capturing this in alternatives.

Author: yeah will add it.

Author: done

---
title: automatic-detection-of-disks-in-Local-Storage-Operator
authors:
  - "@aranjan"
reviewers:

>   - "@jrivera"

Reviewer 7: Add @leseb and @travisn, please.

Author: added.

  - "@jsafrane"
  - "@hekumar"
  - "@chuffman"
  - "@rojoseph"
  - "@sapillai"
approvers:
  - "@jrivera"
  - "@jsafrane"
  - "@hekumar"
  - "@chuffman"
creation-date: 2020-01-21
last-updated: 2020-01-21
status: implementable
---

# Automatic detection of Disks in Local-Storage-Operator 

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> When working with bare-metal OpenShift clusters, due to the absence of storage-provisioners like that in the cloud there needs a lot of manual work to be done for consuming local storage from nodes. The idea is to automate the manual that is required for consuming local-storage from the OpenShift cluster.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When working with bare-metal OpenShift clusters, due to the absence of storage provisioners like that in the cloud, there is a lot of manual work to be done for consuming local storage from nodes. The idea is to automate the manual steps that are required for consuming local storage in an OpenShift cluster by extending the local storage operator (LSO).
```

Author: added.

## Motivation

> For consuming local storage from the nodes available in the OpenShift cluster a good amount of manual work has to be done for creating local PVs out of it, making hot-swapping of disks tough.

Reviewer 7: "making hot-swapping of disks tough" <-- not sure if this is relevant here.

Author: removed.

> For consuming local storage from the nodes available in the OpenShift cluster a good amount of manual work has to be done for creating local PVs out of it, making hot-swapping of disks tough.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To facilitate the consumption of locally-attached storage devices on OpenShift nodes in a cloud-native way.
```

Author: added.

### Goals

> - Automatically detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Automatic detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.
```

Author: done

- Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.

> - Should have options for excluding a particular kind of disks.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Should have options for filtering particular kinds of disks.
```

Author: added.

> 

Reviewer 4: We should have options for including disks based on properties such as name, size, manufacturer, etc.

Reviewer 5: I think we can just start with a "type", and expand the API later to filter on other properties.

Author: yeah, we can initially start with some basic types and leave room for expansion. Anyway i updated the proposal with @travisn 's suggestion.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

`local-storage-operator`is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of it, but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR. The idea is to bring in one more layer of CR above it called `AutoDetectVolumes`.

> The controller for this CR will be responsible for automatically detecting disks/devices from the available nodes and creating/managing the life cycle of `LocalVolumes` which are governed by the `AutoDetectVolumes`.s

Reviewer 2: Will this new CR make the existing behavior (of detecting the device from device path) redundant ? will it completely remove the existing behavior? in short, how will both the new and existing behavior of reading devices work together? (maybe the question is out of scope since its only the API design PR)

Reviewer 5: I'll chime in and agree that it's beyond the scope of this PR. :)

### Risks and Mitigations

- Detecting disks that contain data and/or are in-use.
- Ensuring disks aren't re-detected as new or otherwise destroyed if their device path changes.

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```
type DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType string

const (

> 	raid DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "raid"

Reviewer 4: At least for Ceph we only need to detect raw devices and possibly partitions. Is there a requirement for raid? Ceph won't be consuming raid.

Reviewer 5: If we can detect it, no sense limiting the functionality by the needs of only one consumer. Or at the very least, making API space for it.

Author: yeah I think the current API structure has room for expanding to this in future.

)

type AutoDetectVolumeList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Items           []AutoDetectVolume `json:"items"`
}

type AutoDetectVolume struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Spec              AutoDetectVolumeSpec   `json:"spec"`
	Status            AutoDetectVolumeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeSpec struct {
	// StorageClass name to use for set of matched devices
	StorageClassName string `json:"storageClassName"`
	// Volume mode. Raw or with file system
	// + optional
	VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
	// File system type
	// +optional
	FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
	// Nodes on which the autoDetection must run
	// +optional
	NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
	// DeviceDiscoverPolicies are the list of policies that AutoDetectVolume's controller
	// will be looking for during detection
	DeviceDiscoveryPolicies []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicies,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
	Status string `json:"status"`
}

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicy struct {

> 	// Device type that should be used for auto detection. This would be one of the types supported

Reviewer 7: What about partitions?

Reviewer 2: and logical volumes?

Reviewer 5: If possible, I'd ask to just start with raw devices of whatever type we can easily detect. Just be careful to allow room for expanding functionality to support partitions and LVM artifacts.

Reviewer 3: `lvm` and `part` are detected by the same effort. I think it would be effort to exclude them. That's based on my assumption that everything listed here are possible value's for `lsblk`'s TYPE column. 
If that's the case just add them to the doc's list @ashishranjan738 and mention that these are possible value's for `lsblk`'s TYPE column.

Reviewer 6: Is the `DeviceType` optional or required field? Can you clarify?

Author: DeviceType is a required field.

> 	// by the local-storage operator. Initial possible types can be - crypt,raid1, raid4, raid5,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	// by the local-storage operator. Initial possible types can be - crypt, raid1, raid4, raid5,
```

Author: added.

	// raid10, multipath, disk, tape, printer, processor, worm, rom, scanner, mo-disk, changer,
	// comm, raid, enclosure, rbc, osd, and no-lun.

> 	DeviceType DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`

Reviewer 7: Shouldn't this be a list of desired type?

Author: we already have a list of device polices https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/190/files#diff-ea6b51c2a2234cd3fb1280d7332fd70aR98

Reviewer 3: I don't like the idea of having to have an entire DeviceDiscoveryPolicy per type we want to inlcude. I think we should have a list here.

Also, NodeSelector and StorageClassName should be inside DeviceDiscoveryPolicy, so that you can specify multiple storageclasses per AutoDetectVolume

	// comm, raid, enclosure, rbc, osd, and no-lun.
	DeviceType DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`
	// A list of regular expressions that will be used to exclude certain devices
	// For example - ["^rbd[0-9]+p?[0-9]{0,}$"]
	// +optional

> 	DeviceInclusionFilter []string `json:"deviceInclusionFilter"`

Reviewer 6: Why is this an array? `DeviceDiscoveryPolicies` is already an array and `DeviceType` is a single value but `DeviceInclusionFilter` is an array. This does not make much sense.

Author: Changed it to string.

> 	DeviceInclusionFilter []string `json:"deviceInclusionFilter"`

Reviewer 6: The comment is outdated. It says "exclude certain" devices.  Also what happens when Inclusion filter includes a device but `DeviceType` does not include the type of those devices?

Author: yeah updated it.

> 	ExcludeRotational bool `json:"excludeRotational"`

Reviewer 4: I'd suggest also wording these to be inclusive. For example, `includeRotational` and `includeNonRotational`. We will also want other properties (maybe not in the first implementation) for min size, max size, manufacturer, etc.

Author: done.

	// For excluding non rotational devices like SSDs
	// +optional
	ExcludeNonRotational bool `json:"excludeNonRotational"`
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: Please also add a description of the components involved in the auto discovery. 
1. Is there already a daemon running on each node for the local storage provisioning? Can we use that for discovery as well? 
1. What is the flow from the time a node is added to the cluster to when the node's devices are discovered and a local PV is created? 
1. Show an example of the AutoDetectVolumes CR and an example of how to consume the local storage PV automatically generated. Or perhaps the latter is already in the local storage docs.

Reviewer 6: There is already a daemon running on the node, which can be used for discovering devices. But this enhancement does not clarify how it intends to use that daemon. Based on `AutoDetectVolume` object, is the daemon going to create `LocalVolume` objects? If so, `LocalVolume` objects have to be created from the node. It would mean giving enhanced access to node objects.

Author: added the example of the CR and some more description of the flow.

> 	IncludeNonRotational bool `json:"includeNonRotational"`

Reviewer 6: These comments and field names don't align. Comment says "exclude" and name says "include"...

Reviewer 6: Also, as a general rule - I don't like boolean values, if ssd/hdd needs to be a separate rule - it should be made into a enum.

Author: yeah updated the comment and changed the rule to enum.

> }

Reviewer 3: Should we also have a size range to give the users the option to allow the user to create multiple storageclasses for different size ranges? Otherwise something requesting 1Gi of storage could possibly be assigned 10Ti.
This introduces the problem of multiple AutoDetectVolumes matching the same device. This could be solved by a weight number.
Another acceptable answer to me: we only support one AutoDetectVolume per node for now.

Reviewer 6: I would start with something simple... if matching bigger disks is a problem, we might have to look into dynamic provisioning and things..

Author: I added some more filtration options in the scheme which doesn't need to be implemented initially but I think it will be good to have them in future.

### Test Plan

> - The integration tests for Local-Storage operators already exists. Those tests needs to be upgraded for testing this features.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- The integration tests for Local-Storage operators already exist. Those tests need to be upgraded for testing these features.
```

Reviewer 4: nit: upgraded --> updated

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The integration tests for the LSO already exist. These tests will need to be updated to test this feature.
```

Author: added.

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Examples

These are generalized examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned
[maturity levels][maturity-levels].

##### Removing a deprecated feature

- None of the features are getting deprecated

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

N/A

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives

> - Existing manual creation of LocalVolume CRs. With the node selector on the LocalVolume, a single CR can apply to an entire class of nodes (i.e., a machineset or a physical rack of homogeneous hardware).When a machineset is defined, a corresponding LocalVolume can also be created. Why is this insufficient ?

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Existing manual creation of LocalVolume CRs. With the node selector on the LocalVolume, a single CR can apply to an entire class of nodes (i.e., a machineset or a physical rack of homogeneous hardware). When a machineset is defined, a corresponding LocalVolume can also be created. Why is this insufficient?
```

Author: added.

## Motivation

To facilitate the consumption of locally-attached storage devices on OpenShift nodes in a cloud-native way.

### Goals

- Automatic detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.
- Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.
- Should have options for filtering particular kind of disks based on properties such as name, size, manufacturer, etc.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

`local-storage-operator`is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of it, but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR. The idea is to bring in one more layer of CR above it called `AutoDetectVolumes`.
The controller for this CR will be responsible for automatically detecting disks/devices from the available nodes and creating/managing the life cycle of `LocalVolumes` which are governed by the `AutoDetectVolumes`.s

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer: Please add mitigations for the risks.

Reviewer 7: Yes, I think this section should have a list of "check" that the discovery daemon will implement to make sure the device is usable (no fs, no locks, not too small, non read-only etc etc).

Author: added the mitigations. Thanks @rohantmp

- Detecting disks that contain data and/or are in-use.
- Ensuring disks aren't re-detected as new or otherwise destroyed if their device path changes.

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```
type DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType string

const (
	// The DeviceDiscoveryPolicies that will be supported by the LSO.
	// These Discovery policies will based on lsblk's type output
	disk DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "disk"

> 	part DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "part"

Author: These policies can be expanded in the future based on the requirement. I think initially we can start with the above two.

)

type AutoDetectVolumeList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Items           []AutoDetectVolume `json:"items"`
}

type AutoDetectVolume struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Spec              AutoDetectVolumeSpec   `json:"spec"`
	Status            AutoDetectVolumeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeSpec struct {
	// StorageClass name to use for set of matched devices
	StorageClassName string `json:"storageClassName"`
	// Nodes on which the autoDetection must run
	// +optional
	NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
	// DeviceDiscoverPolicies are the list of policies that AutoDetectVolume's controller
	// will be looking for during detection

> 	DeviceDiscoveryPolicies []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicies,omitempty"`

Reviewer 7: Instead, what about:

```
type DeviceDiscoveryPolicyList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=metadata"`
	Items []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"items" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=items"`
}
```

Kubernetes does that for a couple of resources.

Reviewer 3: `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy` is not a CR, it is sub field of the PR. Why would we need type meta?

I am in favor of renaming the CR to DeviceDiscoveryPolicy, and what is currently DeviceDiscoveryPolicies to DeviceTypes.

Reviewer 7: Forget about the meta, List with Items looks cleaner to me.

Author: cool will add it

> 	DeviceDiscoveryPolicies []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicies,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: I am in favor of renaming the CR to DeviceDiscoveryPolicy, and what is currently DeviceDiscoveryPolicies to DeviceTypes.

}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
	Status string `json:"status"`
}

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicy struct {
	// Device type that should be used for auto detection. This would be one of the types supported
	// by the local-storage operator. Initial possible types can be - crypt, raid1, raid4, raid5,
	// raid10, multipath, disk, tape, printer, processor, worm, rom, scanner, mo-disk, changer,
	// comm, raid, enclosure, rbc, osd, and no-lun.
	DeviceType DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`

> 	// File system type

Reviewer 7: How does that differ from VolumeMode? Why would we look for FS on a device?

Reviewer 3: This is the type of the FS that we would create if the VolumeMode is Filesystem.

Author: yup

	// +optional
	FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
	// Volume mode. Raw or with file system
	// + optional
	VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
	// DeviceInclusionSpec are the filtration rules for including a device in the device discovery
	// +optional
	DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational,nonRotational and
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
	// The mechanical properties of the devices
	Rotational                 DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotational"
	NonRotational              DeviceMechanicalProperty = "nonRotational"
	RotationalAndNonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotationalAndNonRotational"
)

> type DeviceInclusionSpec struct {

Author: And I think these inclusion rules can be changed based on the experience and requirement in the future.

	// A regular expression that will be used to include certain devices
	// For example - "^rbd[0-9]+p?[0-9]{0,}$"
	// +optional

> 	DeviceNamePattern string `json:"deviceNameFilter"`

Author: Initially, we can start by only supporting this filtration option.

> 	DeviceNamePattern string `json:"deviceNameFilter"`

Reviewer 7: I wouldn't name device, just go with model/size/rota should be enough.

Author: That pattern is for device paths like `/dev/sda`, `/dev/sdb`, etc.

Author: we removed it.

	// The devices of this mechanicalPropery will be included.
	// By default it is RotationalAndNonRotational(or SSD/HDD both)
	// +optional
	DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

	// The minimum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MinSize *int `json:"minSize"`

	// The maximum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MaxSize *int `json:"maxSize"`

	// The list of device models which need to be included
	// +optional
	Models []string `json:"model"`

	// The list of device uuids which needs to be included
	// +optional

> 	UUID []string `json:"uuid"`

Reviewer: Is UUID meaningful for autodetection? If I knew the UUID of the device I want, wouldn't I just create a LocalVolume?

Author: yeah makes sense removed it.

	// Devices with these fsType will be included
	// +optional

> 	FSType []string `json:"fstype"`

Reviewer: How does this interact with `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy.FSType` and `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy.VolumeMode`?
Will it re-format? Must they match? Is this likely to cause a device to no longer match, and what happens then?

Author: I thought it will look for a matching fsType devices initially and no re-formatting, by a similar approach `lsblk -ln -o NAME,FSTYPE`. But yeah it could cause no longer matching. So removing this for now.

	// Devices with below labels will be included
	// +optional
	Labels []string `json:"label"`
}
```

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer: What aspects are expected to be tricky and warrant particular testing attention?
What particular aspects need to be tested due to potential for data loss?

Author: Added some testing descriptions.

- The integration tests for the LSO already exist. These tests will need to be updated to test this feature.

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Examples

These are generalized examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned
[maturity levels][maturity-levels].

##### Removing a deprecated feature

- None of the features are getting deprecated

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

N/A

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Drawbacks

N/A

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: Please add more detail: Why should the proposed design be chosen over these alternatives?

Author: added

	// Minimum number of Devices that needs to be detected
	MinDeviceCount int `json:"minDeviceCount"`
	// +optional
	// Maximum number of Devices that needs to be detected
	MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`
	// File system type
	// +optional
	FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
	// Volume mode. Raw or with file system
	// + optional
	VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
	// DeviceInclusionSpec are the filtration rules for including a device in the device discovery
	// +optional
	DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational,nonRotational and
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
	// The mechanical properties of the devices
	// Rotational refers to magnetic disks
	Rotational    DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotational"
	// NonRotational refers to ssds
	NonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "nonRotational"
)

type DeviceInclusionSpec struct {
	// The devices of this mechanicalPropery will be included.
	// By default it is RotationalAndNonRotational(or SSD/HDD both)
	// +optional

> 	DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

Reviewer 3: I don't like the idea of disallowing the user from mixing SSDs and HDDs in a storageclass. The user might want to divide based on other criteria. More use-cases might come into play if we extend the `DeviceInclusionSpec` later. Already, we consider `gp2` and `io1` drives slow even though they present themselves as nonRotational.

It's not too important, but why bake an assumption we can avoid?

	// +optional
	DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational,nonRotational and
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
	// The mechanical properties of the devices
	Rotational                 DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotational"
	NonRotational              DeviceMechanicalProperty = "nonRotational"
	RotationalAndNonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotationalAndNonRotational"
)

type DeviceInclusionSpec struct {
	// A regular expression that will be used to include certain devices
	// For example - "^rbd[0-9]+p?[0-9]{0,}$"
	// +optional
	DeviceNamePattern string `json:"deviceNameFilter"`

	// The devices of this mechanicalPropery will be included.
	// By default it is RotationalAndNonRotational(or SSD/HDD both)
	// +optional
	DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

	// The minimum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MinSize *int `json:"minSize"`

	// The maximum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MaxSize *int `json:"maxSize"`

> 

Reviewer 6: This should be `resource.Quanity` type

Author: done

	// The list of device models which need to be included
	// +optional
	Models []string `json:"model"`

	// Devices with below labels will be included
	// +optional
	Labels []string `json:"label"`
}
```

An example of autoDetectVolume CR instance:
```
apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1
kind: AutoDetectVolume
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec: 
  storageClassName: example-storageclass
  nodeSelector:
  deviceDiscoverPolicies:
    items:
      - deviceType: part
        fsType: ext4

>         volumeMode: RWO

Reviewer 6: volumemode is typically raw block vs fs type.

Author: yup updated

## Motivation

To facilitate the consumption of locally-attached storage devices on OpenShift nodes in a cloud-native way.

### Goals

- Automatic detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.
- Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.
- Should have options for filtering particular kind of disks based on properties such as name, size, manufacturer, etc.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

`local-storage-operator`is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of it, but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR. The idea is to bring in one more layer of CR above it called `AutoDetectVolumes`.
The controller for this CR will be responsible for automatically detecting disks/devices from the available nodes and creating/managing the life cycle of `LocalVolumes` which are governed by the `AutoDetectVolumes`.

### Risks and Mitigations

- LSO will detect disks that contain data and/or are in-use via the following checks:

>   - We can open the device exclusively.

Reviewer 7: The disk is either in the "running" or "live" state.

Reviewer 3: From googling, I couldn't find any documentation of the `live` state which I saw. The only documentation I could find was one `running` and one possible bad state of `suspended`.

I pushed a check for the absence of `suspended`. Does that work?

Reviewer 7: Sounds good to me.

Author: cool done.

	// The minimum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MinSize resource.Quantity `json:"minSize"`

	// The maximum size of the device which needs to be included
	// +optional
	MaxSize resource.Quantity `json:"maxSize"`

	// List of models that needs to be included
	// +optional
	Models []string `json:"models"`

	// List of vendors that needs to be
	// +optional
	Vendors []string `json:"vendors"`
}
```

An example of autoDetectVolume CR instance:
```
apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1
kind: AutoDetectVolume
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec:
  nodeSelector: null
  deviceDiscoverPolicies:
    - fsType: ext4
      storageClassName: example-storageclass1
      volumeMode: filesystem
      minDeviceCount: 5
      deviceInclusionSpec:
        deviceType: part
        deviceMechanicalProperty: nonRotational
        minSize: 10G
        maxSize: 100G
    - storageClassName: example-storageclass2
      volumeMode: Block
      minDeviceCount: 5
      maxDeviceCount: 10
      deviceInclusionSpec:
        deviceType: disk
        deviceMechanicalProperty: rotational
        minSize: 10G

>         maxSize: 100G

Reviewer 7: Please add "model" and "vendor" property too. Please provide 2 examples: a simple one and a more advanced one. Thanks!

Author: add some more examples

  - can be openened exclusively.
  - is not read-only.
  - is not removable.
  - has no child partitions.
  - has no FS signature.
  - state (as outputted by `lsblk`) is not `suspended`
- Ensuring disks aren't re-detected as new or otherwise destroyed if their device path changes.
  - This is already ensured by the current LSO approach of consuming disks by their `UUID`

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```go

type AutoDetectVolumeList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Items           []AutoDetectVolume `json:"items"`
}

type AutoDetectVolume struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Spec              AutoDetectVolumeSpec   `json:"spec"`
    Status            AutoDetectVolumeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeSpec struct {
    // Nodes on which the automatic detection policies must run.
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // DeviceDiscoverPolicies are the list of policies that AutoDetectVolume's controller
    // will be looking for during detection

>     DeviceDiscoveryPolicies []DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicies,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Why allow multiple policies in the same CR? Seems like we should have a single policy defined in each CR. The behavior should be the same. But then it's more clear that they are independent policies.

Reviewer 7: A single policy per CR is what we want I believe.

Author: yup updated

Reviewer 3: I thought it would be good to have a convention one CR control one set of node labels. The exisiting LocalVolume CR allows the creation of multiple device to storageclass associations.

}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
    Status string `json:"status"`
}

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicy struct {
    // StorageClassName to use for set of matched devices
    StorageClassName string `json:"storageClassName"`
    // MinDeviceCount is the minumum number of devices that needs to be detected per node.

>     MinDeviceCount int `json:"minDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 6: This is actually per node AND per storageclass. So technically user can create more local PVs by specifying a different storageclass. So this value is not really on per-node basis. cc @jsafrane

Reviewer 6: What is the behaviour when a node does not have requested `minDeviceCount`? Is LSO supposed to not provision any PVs at all on the node or is it supposed to provision just number of available devices and log an error event?

Author: yes no pvs will be provisioned if the findings didn't match the `minDeviceCount`.

Reviewer 8: Then please add it to the comment

Reviewer 3: @leseb can you reconfirm that this is the behaviour we decided on? Just for my peace of mind :grimacing:

Reviewer 7: If `minDeviceCount` is not provided, we should probably go for all devices matching the rule. And yes, if `minDeviceCount` doesn't strictly match on all nodes, nothing will be done.

    // +optional
    // Maximum number of Devices that needs to be detected per node.
    MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`
    // VolumeMode determines whether the PV created is Block or Filesystem
    // + optional
    VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
    // FSType type to be used when volumeMode is Filesystem
    // +optional
    FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
    // DeviceInclusionSpec are the filtration rules for including a device in the device discovery
    // +optional
    DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational, nonRotational or
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
    // The mechanical properties of the devices
    // Rotational refers to magnetic disks
    Rotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotational"
    // NonRotational refers to ssds
    NonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "nonRotational"
    // RotationalAndNonRotational refers to both magnetic and ssds

>     RotationalAndNonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotationalAndNonRotational"

Reviewer 4: This value represents when you don't want to filter out based on the rotational or non-rotational values, right? Seems like the empty string would more simply represent not to filter on this field.

Author: hmm makes sense.

Author: done

    // by the local-storage operator. Currently the supported types are: disk,part
    // If the list is empty the default value will be `[disk]`.
    DeviceTypes []DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`

    // DeviceMechanicalProperty denotes whether Rotational or NonRotational disks should be used.
    // by default, RotationalAndNonRotational which matches all disks.
    // +optional
    DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

    // MinSize is the minimum size of the device which needs to be included
    // +optional
    MinSize resource.Quantity `json:"minSize"`

    // MaxSize is the maximum size of the device which needs to be included
    // +optional
    MaxSize resource.Quantity `json:"maxSize"`

    // Models is a list of device models. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional
    Models []string `json:"models"`
    // Vendors is a list of device vendors. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional

>     Vendors []string `json:"vendors"`

Reviewer 6: Do we expect to use these in the first cut the API? As discussed in the call - it is easy to think of a field as "nice to have", but we will not be able to remove these fields from the API once added and we will have to forever support quirks associated with model and vendor names.

Author: These were suggested by @leseb as a good to have. @leseb can we have this in future implementation. I can open an issue to keep this on track?

Reviewer 7: I can't think of a good reason not to have this in the first iteration. So I'd vote to keep it.

Author: cool removed

Author: okay

Reviewer 6: I would still argue that these can be added later if needed. How likely it is that customer is adding disks from different vendors/models and wants to create storageclasses sorted by vendors/models?  Some of the fields in LSO api was added as customers asked them, such fixes can be backported if they are backward compatible.

Reviewer 7: If you don't have these fields and you have NVMe and SSD drives of the same size then you cannot tell the difference.

Author: can we have NVMe as a new discover policy ?

Reviewer 7: Why? How?

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/190/files#diff-ea6b51c2a2234cd3fb1280d7332fd70aR141 here adding one more constant as nvme

Reviewer 7: The only way to detect an NVMe is via the `TRAN` output of lsblk, the `TYPE` won't work.

Reviewer 4: While I agree we need to be careful about every property we add, model and vendor seem very useful, even if not frequently needed.

Author: cool keeping this for now.

}
```

An example of autoDetectVolume CR instance:

```yaml
apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1
kind: AutoDetectVolume
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    nodeSelectorTerms:
    - matchExpressions:
      - key: kubernetes.io/hostname
        operator: In
          values:
          - worker-0
          - worker-1
  deviceDiscoverPolicies:
    - fsType: ext4
      storageClassName: example-storageclass1
      volumeMode: filesystem
      minDeviceCount: 5
      deviceInclusionSpec:
        deviceTypes:
        - part
        deviceMechanicalProperty: nonRotational
        minSize: 10G
        maxSize: 100G

>     - storageClassName: example-storageclass2

Reviewer 4: Multiple policies in the same CR is confusing to me. These are independent policies, right?

Author: yes these are independent policies.

- Have options for filtering particular kind of disks based on properties such as name, size, manufacturer, etc.

### Non-Goals

- Inherently protect against confilict with provisioners that own local devices on the same nodes automatic detection is configured to run.

## Proposal

The `local-storage-operator` is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of them,
but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR.
The idea is to introduce a new Custom Resource, `AutoDetectVolumes`, that enables automated discovery and provisioning of local volume based PVs on a set of nodes addressed by one or more labelSelectors.

### Risks and Mitigations

- LSO will detect disks that contain data and/or are in-use via ensuring that the device:
  - can be openened exclusively.
  - is not read-only.
  - is not removable.
  - has no child partitions.
  - has no FS signature.
  - state (as outputted by `lsblk`) is not `suspended`
- Ensuring disks aren't re-detected as new or otherwise destroyed if their device path changes.
  - This is already ensured by the current LSO approach of consuming disks by their `UUID`

> 

Reviewer 6: We need to document recovery from errors. What happens if user has made a mistake and wants to undo "creation" of `AutodetectVolume` object?

Reviewer 4: If they want to remove a volume that was automatically created, they would need to:
1. Update the CR so it doesn't pick up the device(s) automatically that aren't desired
2. The admin would need to delete/cleanup the PV

@gnufied Is that along the lines of what you are asking?

Author: and does this documentation need to come with this PR?

Reviewer 6: That is fine, we just need to ensure that this is captured somewhere.  As limitation or something, so as this can be documented later.

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```go

type AutoDetectVolumeList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Items           []AutoDetectVolume `json:"items"`
}

type AutoDetectVolume struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Spec              AutoDetectVolumeSpec   `json:"spec"`
    Status            AutoDetectVolumeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeSpec struct {
    // Nodes on which the automatic detection policies must run.
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

>     // StorageClassName to use for set of matched devices

Reviewer 6: We are going to need `Tolerations` field same as `LocalVolume` object.

Author: added it

    StorageClassName string `json:"storageClassName"`
    // MinDeviceCount is the minumum number of devices that needs to be detected per node.
    // If the match devices are less than the minCount specified then no PVs will be created.

>     MinDeviceCount int `json:"minDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 6: Is `MinDeviceCount` not an optional field?

Reviewer 4: is `0` equivalent to being optional?

Reviewer 6: I don't like 0 being optional. If this field is designed to be optional, it should be called out so.

Author: I wasn't thinking of keeping this field as optional and yeah the default value will be `0`.

Reviewer 6: when you say something has a "default" value if user does not supply a value, then isn't that what is called "optional"?

Reviewer 6: I am trying to stick to how APIs are designed in k8s and we always label a field as optional if it can be skipped by the user and api-server or controller assumes a default value, if field is missing.

    // +optional
    // Maximum number of Devices that needs to be detected per node.
    MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`
    // VolumeMode determines whether the PV created is Block or Filesystem
    // + optional

>     VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: we can nail down this in API design but we need to specify what is the default if no volume mode is specified.

Author: It will be a block mode PV. Added it in the comment.

    // FSType type to create when volumeMode is Filesystem
    // +optional

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: I thought we also discussed to have a boolean "dry-run" value which just finds the devices and not really creates them. We are also going to need to design a type that could hold the devices found on the node. We can use configmap or a new type...

Reviewer 4: I disagree with the dry-run value approach. CRs already represent desired state. Using them for dry-run state just doesn't seem right. Discovery should store the available device list somewhere that the UI can load it, present the devices to the user, then create CRs when the user is ready to commit the devices.

Reviewer 5: Okay, but then that still leaves us with an unsolved problem. We want the ability for the UI to trigger a filtering of the set of all discovered devices without 1. Commiting to whatever the result it or 2. Forcing the UI to reimplement the filtering logic of the backend. What's your counter proposal here?

Reviewer 4: The UI is given all the metadata it needs to present the available devices to the user and the UI has to display a reasonable UI around those properties. The filtering itself seems like it would already need to be baked into the UI, such as knowing which nodes hold which devices and how much storage is on each node. 

Where is the filtering complicated enough that we wouldn't have reasonable confidence that the desired state generated in the CR wouldn't end up with the expected PVs?

Reviewer 5: The problem for me lies in the duplication of effort that needs to be maintained in sync by two separate teams that may not be in regular contact with each other. It's not that it's difficult, it's that it's inefficient and more of a long-term maintenance headache than the proposed solution.

Reviewer 4: The maintenance points between the teams would be:
- Discovery info (generated by the LSO discovery and consumed by the UI)
- CRs (generated by the UI and consumed by the LSO)

Where is the duplication of effort? The UI has to implement filtering in the UI widgets and LSO implements filtering to generate the PVs. It seems like very different implementation.

Reviewer 5: There are two sets of information I'm considering:

1. The set of all local devices detected
2. The set of all local devices matching the DeviceDiscoveryPolicy filter

The LSO would need to present set 1 for the UI to present it to the user. Then the user enters filtering information to the UI, which would be in the form of fields that match a DeviceDiscoveryPolicy CR. This would then cause the UI to update and display set 2. 

Here's where I feel like I'm missing something: If the UI does this filtering to generate set 2 on its own it is essentially duplicating the discovery the operator would do based on the final DeviceDiscoveryPolicy CR. This feels like we'd be opening ourselves up to a situation where the operator could change something about how it evaluates the CR without changing the API. Now this is something that has to be duplicates back to the UI so it displays set 2 correctly.

Does that make sense as a concern, at least?

Reviewer 4: The input to the UI is set 1. The output of the UI is the auto discovery CR. Whatever the UI decides to show before it outputs the CR is up to the UI team and is only based on set 1. IMO there is no set 2 unless perhaps the UI finds it useful for some intermediate state before generating the CR. But that's just internal UI implementation. 

If the operator changes some semantics around the CR that impacts the UI, sounds like it's a backward compatibility bug. We would need to test that changes to the CR in the future are compatible with the UI. Beyond this, I don't see a concern.

Reviewer 6: How or what component generates this device list which can be fed to the UI?

Reviewer 4: @jarrpa and I had a discussion on this... Most importantly, the discussion shouldn't block this design PR. Let's keep pushing to get this merged soon. Jose will start a new thread with this topic.

Reviewer 8: >  Most importantly, the discussion shouldn't block this design PR

This discussion is the root of this PR. If the filtering is done in UI, why do we need complicated rules in LSO? UI, knowing which devices user selected / filtered, can create LocalVolume CRs directly, without any `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy`.

Note that output of LSO are Kubernetes PVs to be consumed by OCS (or anything else), not hardware inventory of all disks on a node.

From what I read above, some UI wants to  present hardware inventory and once user selects / filters the devices then UI does *something* so PVs are created. We are discussing the *something* here in this PR, however, I haven't read anything about how the HW inventory gets to UI in the first place. Will there be another daemon running on all nodes collecting information about block devices, just like LSO, only presenting them to Kubernetes in another way than LSO does???

Reviewer 4: @jsafrane The reason we discussed having a separate thread for this topic is that this design doc is independent from the UI. The UI will need to build on top of this new design, but fundamentally this AutoDetectVolume CR doesn't need any UI around it in order to configure the devices. Though if something in this design is blocking the UI design, then I would certainly want to resolve it here.

> From what I read above, some UI wants to present hardware inventory and once user selects / filters the devices then UI does something so PVs are created. We are discussing the something here in this PR

That *something* for the UI to create PVs would be to create the AutoDetectVolume CR(s). This is the signal that the UI is ready to commit to the device selection properties that the user decided on. That *something* could also be for the UI to create individual CRs for each of the devices, and there would be no need for the AutoDetectVolume CR. IMHO, the AutoDetectVolume is a better approach for the UI, but if we settle on the other approach during UI design, then so be it. 

> however, I haven't read anything about how the HW inventory gets to UI in the first place. Will there be another daemon running on all nodes collecting information about block devices, just like LSO, only presenting them to Kubernetes in another way than LSO does???

The thought is that the LSO daemons that are already running on all the nodes would be able to discover the available devices and store their properties *somewhere* for the UI to discover. That *somewhere* could be a ConfigMap for each node, stored as JSON. Or maybe a new CRD type should be created. The CRD seems like overkill since there is nothing for an operator to reconcile. LSO just needs to communicate metadata to the UI.

Reviewer 8: > The thought is that the LSO daemons that are already running on all the nodes would be able to discover the available devices and store their properties somewhere for the UI to discover. 

This was not part of this enhancement. Can we get **all** requirements on LSO into this enhancement, with all API objects and a complete work flow from a "blank" OCP cluster to a cluster with OCS installed (or at least ready to be installed)? Otherwise we may end up with half designed solution that won't make anyone happy.

To me it looks like this PR is trying to reinvent [OpenEBS disk manager](https://github.com/openebs/node-disk-manager/blob/master/docs/design.md)

Reviewer 4: If I were to summarize all the meetings and design discussions...
1. OpenShift admins need a UI to select which devices will be exposed as local PVs
   - The UI needs to display available storage for devices that don't yet have PVs. The UI  (pending UI design) would not show individual devices, but would show some representation of available storage and allow the user to filter devices out of the selection based on ssd/hdd, size, or other properties.
   - The UI would drive LSO to create the local PVs 
   - Different types of devices should be available through different storage classes (ssds vs nvme vs hdd)
1. OCS UI needs to detect what local PVs are available and allow the user to configure OCS to use some subset of the available storage.

We don't see #1 as being under the OCS scope since the local PVs could also be used outside of OCS.

@gnufied Since you've been in most of the discussions, does this match your expectation as well?

@jsafrane There are at least several other solutions in the community for local PV configuration and LSO overlaps with them. Our discussions have been to take a dependency on LSO. Are you suggesting LSO isn't the right place for this? Or simply pointing out a similar design?

    // DeviceInclusionSpec is the filtration rule for including a device in the device discovery
    // +optional
    DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {

>     Status string `json:"status"`

Reviewer 6: Please expand this type.

Reviewer 4: How about adding [pod conditions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-conditions) instead of a single status string?

Author: Not sure adding pod conditions will be a good idea here. I think the status should be reflecting the discovery progress.

Reviewer 5: I think expanding this, whatever you had in mind, would be overkill for an MVP. We should be able ot get by with just a simple string for the time being, unless you have something else specific in mind.

Reviewer 6: what will be the support status of this new feature? I proposed to keep this alpha for now. but even then keeping this field as a simple string is not going to be enough. In LSO we typically try to stick to specs provided to us by api team - https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types.go#L97

I am not sure if all fields in that type will be necessary but even for MVP/alpha feature, we should pick and propose fields we are going to use, so that this can be discussed during the design phase.

    // +optional
    MinSize resource.Quantity `json:"minSize"`

    // MaxSize is the maximum size of the device which needs to be included
    // +optional
    MaxSize resource.Quantity `json:"maxSize"`

    // Models is a list of device models. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional
    Models []string `json:"models"`

    // Vendors is a list of device vendors. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional
    Vendors []string `json:"vendors"`
}
```

The existing LSO daemon will create PVs that match the `AutoDetectVolume` criteria.

### Test Plan

- The integration tests for the LSO already exist. These tests will need to be updated to test this feature.
- The tests must ensure that detection of devices are working/updating correctly.
- The tests must ensure that data corruption are not happening during auto detection of devices.

### Graduation Criteria

- Documentation exists for the behaviour of each configuration item.
- Unit and End to End tests coverage is sufficient.

#### Examples

> 

Reviewer 6: At this point - we should also start designing the flow of device discovery from control-plane and into the node.

Reviewer 4: How about we proceed with this design PR and save device discovery and UI flow for a future PR? Seems like they are fully independent per my comment above about not having a dry-run flag.

Author: makes sense to have a separate PR for the flow.

Reviewer 6: By future PR - do you mean another design PR? Do we expect that to merge by enhancement freeze deadline?  The reason I have been asking for flow is because - I am not sure how this new type will be used. Are we going to modify existing controllers to watch `AutoDetectVolume` types too? It will be good to have some clarity before we can be sure about the design.

    // be block
    // + optional
    VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
    // FSType type to create when volumeMode is Filesystem
    // +optional
    FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`
    // If specified, a list of tolerations to pass to the discovery daemons.
	  // +optional
	  Tolerations []corev1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // DeviceInclusionSpec is the filtration rule for including a device in the device discovery
    // +optional
    DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
    Status string `json:"status"`
}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational, nonRotational or
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
    // The mechanical properties of the devices
    // Rotational refers to magnetic disks
    Rotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "Rotational"
    // NonRotational refers to ssds
    NonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "NonRotational"
    // RotationalAndNonRotational refers to both magnetic and ssds

>     RotationalAndNonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = ""

Author: yeah makes sense

---
title: automatic-detection-of-disks-in-Local-Storage-Operator
authors:
  - "@aranjan"
  - "@rohantmp"
reviewers:
  - "@jrivera"
  - "@jsafrane"
  - "@hekumar"
  - "@chuffman"
  - "@rojoseph"
  - "@sapillai"
  - "@leseb"
  - "@travisn"
approvers:
  - "@jrivera"
  - "@jsafrane"
  - "@hekumar"
  - "@chuffman"
creation-date: 2020-01-21
last-updated: 2020-02-18
status: implementable
---

# Automatic detection of Disks in Local-Storage-Operator 

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

When working with bare-metal OpenShift clusters, due to the absence of storage provisioners like those in the cloud, there is a lot of manual work to be done for consuming local storage from nodes.
The idea is to automate the manual steps that are required for consuming local storage in an OpenShift cluster by extending the Local Storage Operator (LSO).

## Motivation

> To facilitate the consumption of locally-attached storage devices on OpenShift nodes in a cloud-native way.

Reviewer 8: This sentence does not say anything.

Author: updated

### Goals

- Automatic detection of available disks from nodes which can be used as PVs for OpenShift-cluster.

> - Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.

Author: until it matches the inclusion filter.

> - Should respond to the attach/detach events of the disks/devices.

Reviewer 3: I think we won't recommend mixing the two methods.

- Should have options for filtering particular kind of disks based on properties such as name, size, manufacturer, etc.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

The `local-storage-operator` is already capable of consuming local disks from the nodes and provisioning PVs out of them,
but the disk/device paths needs to explicitly specified in the `LocalVolume` CR.

> The idea is to introduce a new Custom Resource, `AutoDetectVolumes`, that enables automated discovery andn provisioning of local volume based PVs.

Reviewer 9: nit: and not andn

Author: done thanks

### Risks and Mitigations

- LSO will detect disks that contain data and/or are in-use via ensuring that the device:
  - can be openened exclusively.
  - is not read-only.
  - is not removable.
  - has no child partitions.
  - has no FS signature.

>   - state (as outputted by `lsblk`) is not `suspended`

Reviewer 8: An empty PV (say AWS EBS volume) attached by Kubernetes will pass all these checks. And yet it's not something that should be ever considered to be used as local PV.

Note that AWS EBS volumes attached manually by system admin (or something else) may be a good use case for local volumes.

Reviewer 7: > An empty PV (say AWS EBS volume) attached by Kubernetes will pass all these checks. And yet it's not something that should be ever considered to be used as local PV.

Can you elaborate on why we should not consider them to be used as local PV?

> 
> Note that AWS EBS volumes attached manually by system admin (or something else) may be a good use case for local volumes.

Reviewer 8: Because they are already Kubernetes AWS EBS PVs, bound to a PVC and may get some data soon.

Reviewer 7: How do suggest we check for an available device then?

Reviewer 6: There is just no way to fix this. If user has chosen to run auto-discovery of local devices on a node then he can't schedule regular workloads that consume PV+PVCs.

## Design Details

API scheme for `AutoDetectVolumes`:

```go

type AutoDetectVolumeList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Items           []AutoDetectVolume `json:"items"`
}

type AutoDetectVolume struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`
    Spec              AutoDetectVolumeSpec   `json:"spec"`
    Status            AutoDetectVolumeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeSpec struct {
    // Nodes on which the automatic detection policies must run.
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *corev1.NodeSelector `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // DeviceDiscoverPolicy is the policy that AutoDetectVolume's controller
    // will be looking for during detection
    DeviceDiscoveryPolicy DeviceDiscoveryPolicy `json:"deviceDiscoveryPolicy,omitempty"`
}

type AutoDetectVolumeStatus struct {
    Status string `json:"status"`
}

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicy struct {
    // StorageClassName to use for set of matched devices
    StorageClassName string `json:"storageClassName"`
    // MinDeviceCount is the minumum number of devices that needs to be detected per node.

>     MinDeviceCount int `json:"minDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 7: > * What if there are not enough devices on the node?
If there is not enough devices on the node, we fail, this can be mitigated by increasing the range.

> * What is the "I don't care" value? IMO `nil` should be allowed.

The field could simply be optional, so if empty we don't care and report anything that matches the other rules.

>   All these must be documented in the comment.

    // +optional
    // Maximum number of Devices that needs to be detected per node.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 7: > It's not clear how MinDeviceCount/MaxDeviceCount interacts between different `AutoDetectVolume` instances. Say I have three instances:
> 
> * A: requesting 2 block devices of any size
> * B: requesting 1 device of any size
> * C: requesting any number of devices of any size
> 
> And I have a node with 2 disks (sda, sdb). How are they going to be distributed among the `AutoDetectVolume` instances? Who decides the priority of each `AutoDetectVolume`?
> 

I believe each rule (AutoDetectVolume instance) will be computed in a FIFO manner. The operator watches for CRs and then reconciles them in the order they have been found I think.

> How to express "use 1 devices for OCS and all the other devices as regular LocalVolumes for applications"?
This could be achieved with 2 CRs, one for OCS (with its own rule) and one for the rest (own rule too).
Not sure what's bothering you here.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 8: FIFO basically mean that CRs are processed in random order. With informers and workqueues in multiple external components (LSO, local provisioner,local diskmaker) there is no guarantee about the order.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 7: I guess it doesn't rules matter if rules are properly written. If we don't see any devices for OCS when our CR is computed then this means other rules overrode it (most likely an admin error).

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 6: This came up in designing `LocalVolume` CR too fwiw. Having multiple instances of `AutoDetectVolume` and `LocalVolume` that targets same node is going to be problematic.  Does it even make sense to allow user to target same node via different `AutoDetectVolume` instances?

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 4: If someone targets the same node with multiple policies, it's their responsibility to ensure they are mutually exclusive, or else there will be undefined behavior. Again, with the flexibility comes the ability to shoot yourself in the foot.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 4: > It's not clear how MinDeviceCount/MaxDeviceCount interacts between different `AutoDetectVolume` instances. Say I have three instances:
> 
> * A: requesting 2 block devices of any size
> * B: requesting 1 device of any size
> * C: requesting any number of devices of any size
> 
> And I have a node with 2 disks (sda, sdb). How are they going to be distributed among the `AutoDetectVolume` instances? Who decides the priority of each `AutoDetectVolume`?

Again, I would argue this is undefined behavior and it's ok. It's a burden on the admin to avoid creating conflicting policies. Ideally there would be a UI around LSO that would help enforce non-conflicting policies.

> How to express "use 1 devices for OCS and all the other devices as regular LocalVolumes for applications"?

LSO doesn't know anything about the consumers. LSO is just creating PVs and then will attempt to fulfill requests. OCS is just another consumer. So if some application starts before OCS, there might not be anything left for OCS.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Author: Agreed duplicate PVs will be coming up. I guess we can exclude the duplication by not considering consumed device paths for the PVs.

>     MaxDeviceCount int `json:"maxDeviceCount"`

Reviewer 6: IMO - you should not mark discussions like this as resolved until they have been really conclusively resolved. The reason being - marking a comment as resolved hides it from UI but anyone reading this enhancement in future should be aware that, this issue was discussed but not entirely resolved.

    // VolumeMode determines whether the PV created is Block or Filesystem
    // + optional
    VolumeMode PersistentVolumeMode `json:"volumeMode,omitempty"`
    // FSType type to be used when volumeMode is Filesystem
    // +optional

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Reviewer 6: I think `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy` should be the name given to `DeviceInclusionSpec` and what is called `DeviceDiscoveryPolicy` should be named something else. `LocalVolume` type calls it `StorageClassDevice`..

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Since only a single policy is included now in each CR, we could get rid of the `deviceDiscoveryPolicy` element and move all the settings up a level. I'm envisioning something like this:
```
kind: AutoDetectVolume
metadata:
  name: example-autodetect
spec:
  storageClassName: example-storageclass
  volumeMode: Block
  minDeviceCount: 5
  maxDeviceCount: 10
  deviceProperties:
    types:
    - disk
    - partition
    mechanical: rotational
    minSize: 10G
    maxSize: 100G
  nodeSelector:
    ...
```

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: I'm still for multiple policies, so we establish a convention of governing all policies related to one set of nodes from one CR. Easier to reason about.

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: @rohantmp IMO it's simpler to have a single policy per CR. But since the same set of scenarios are enabled either way, I would vote for simplicity of the CR.

>     FSType string `json:"fsType,omitempty"`

Author: done

    // DeviceInclusionSpec are the filtration rules for including a device in the device discovery
    // +optional

>     DeviceInclusionSpec *DeviceInclusionSpec `json:"deviceInclusionSpec"`

Reviewer 8: Comment says that they are rule**s**, but I can see only one rule is possible.
And since only one rule is possible, why is it a special structure?

Author: just to keep the filtration specs together.

}

// DeviceMechanicalProperty holds the device's mechanical spec. It can be rotational, nonRotational or
// RotationalAndNonRotational
type DeviceMechanicalProperty string

const (
    // The mechanical properties of the devices
    // Rotational refers to magnetic disks

>     Rotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "rotational"

Reviewer 8: Enum values must start with uppercase ("Rotational, "NonRotational')

Author: done

    // NonRotational refers to ssds
    NonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = "nonRotational"
    // RotationalAndNonRotational refers to both magnetic and ssds
    RotationalAndNonRotational DeviceMechanicalProperty = ""
)

type DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType string

const (
    // The DeviceDiscoveryPolicies that will be supported by the LSO.
    // These Discovery policies will based on lsblk's type output
    // Disk represents a device-type of disk
    Disk DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "disk"
    // Part represents a device-type of partion
    Part DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType = "part"
)

type DeviceInclusionSpec struct {
    // DeviceTypes that should be used for automatic detection. This would be one of the types supported
    // by the local-storage operator. Currently the supported types are: disk,part
    // If the list is empty the default value will be `[disk]`.
    DeviceTypes []DeviceDiscoveryPolicyType `json:"deviceType"`

    // DeviceMechanicalProperty denotes whether Rotational or NonRotational disks should be used.
    // by default, RotationalAndNonRotational which matches all disks.
    // +optional

>     DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

Author: done

>     DeviceMechanicalProperty DeviceMechanicalProperty `json:"deviceMechanicalProperty"`

Author: I think we can still keep it as enum because currently there are only three possible values.

    // MinSize is the minimum size of the device which needs to be included
    // +optional
    MinSize resource.Quantity `json:"minSize"`

    // MaxSize is the maximum size of the device which needs to be included
    // +optional
    MaxSize resource.Quantity `json:"maxSize"`

    // Models is a list of device models. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional

>     Models []string `json:"models"`

Reviewer 4: Implementation detail... For models and vendors, I'd suggest we treat it as a case-insensitive substring.

Author: yup

    
    // Vendors is a list of device vendors. If not empty, the device's model as outputted by lsblk needs
    // to contain at least one of these strings.
    // +optional
    Vendors []string `json:"vendors"`
}
```

some examples of autoDetectVolume CR instance:

```yaml

> apiVersion: local.storage.openshift.io/v1

Reviewer 6: Lets designate this new type as `v1alpha` or something similar.

Author: done
